add Accelerating RLHF with vLLM Ray Executor (OpenRLHF) blog (#53)
vllm-project/vllm-project.github.io: _posts/2025-04-18-openrlhf-vllm.md

---
layout: post  

> title: "Accelerating RLHF with vLLM Ray Executor (OpenRLHF)"  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Accelerating RLHF with vLLM, Best Practice from OpenRLHF"
```

author: "The OpenRLHF Team"  
image: /assets/figures/openrlhf-vllm/ray.png  
thumbnail-img: /assets/figures/openrlhf-vllm/ray.png  
share-img: /assets/figures/openrlhf-vllm/ray.png  
---

> As demand grows for training reasoning-capable large language models (LLMs), Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a cornerstone technique. However, conventional RLHF pipelines—especially those using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)—are often hindered by substantial computational overhead. This challenge is particularly pronounced with models that excel at complex reasoning tasks (commonly referred to as O1 models), where generating long chain-of-thought (CoT) outputs can account for up to 90% of total training time. These models must produce detailed, step-by-step reasoning that can span thousands of tokens, making inference significantly more time-consuming than the training phase itself. As a pioneering inference framework, vLLM provides a user-friendly interface for generating RLHF samples and updating model weights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As demand grows for training reasoning-capable large language models (LLMs), Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a cornerstone technique. However, conventional RLHF pipelines—especially those using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)—are often hindered by substantial computational overhead. This challenge is particularly pronounced with models that excel at complex reasoning tasks (such as OpenAI-o1 and DeepSeek-R1), where generating long chain-of-thought (CoT) outputs can account for up to 90% of total training time. These models must produce detailed, step-by-step reasoning that can span thousands of tokens, making inference significantly more time-consuming than the training phase itself. As a pioneering inference framework, vLLM provides a user-friendly interface for generating RLHF samples and updating model weights.
```

<img align="center" src="/assets/figures/openrlhf-vllm/ray.png" alt="Ray and vLLM in OpenRLHF" width="90%" height="90%">

As illustrated above, OpenRLHF uses [Ray’s Placement Group API](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/scheduling/placement-group.html) to flexibly schedule components of the RLHF pipeline, including the vLLM engine, Actor, Critic, Reference, and Reward models. Although represented separately, these components can be colocated in shared Ray placement groups to maximize resource efficiency. For example, all modules can operate within the same GPU group in a hybrid engine configuration, or specific components—such as the Actor and Critic—can be grouped together. All modules are orchestrated by a central Ray Actor, which manages the entire training lifecycle. Weight synchronization between the Actor and the vLLM engine is handled via high-performance communication methods, such as NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL) or CUDA Inter-Process Communication (IPC) memory transfers in hybrid engine settings.

## Implementing RLHF Acceleration with vLLM Ray Executor

> OpenRLHF and vLLM provide a clean and efficient set of APIs to simplify interaction within RLHF pipelines. By implementing a custom `WorkerExtension` class, users can handle weight synchronization between training and inference components. The environment variable `VLLM_RAY_PER_WORKER_GPUS` allows fine-grained GPU resource allocation per worker, enabling hybrid engine configurations where multiple components share a GPU group:

Reviewer: and `VLLM_RAY_BUNDLE_INDICES`

# Create placement group for GPU allocation
pg = placement_group([{"GPU": 1, "CPU": 0}] * 4)
ray.get(pg.ready())

# Create inference engines
inference_engines = []
for bundle_indices in [[0, 1], [2, 3]]:
    llm = ray.remote(
        num_gpus=0,
        scheduling_strategy=PlacementGroupSchedulingStrategy(
            placement_group=pg
        )
    )(MyLLM).remote(
        model="facebook/opt-125m",
        tensor_parallel_size=2,
        distributed_executor_backend="ray",
        gpu_memory_utilization=0.4,
        worker_extension_cls="__main__.ColocateWorkerExtension",
        bundle_indices=bundle_indices
    )
    inference_engines.append(llm)
```

[The complete example](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/getting_started/examples/rlhf_colocate.html) walks through initializing Ray with a specified GPU count, creating a placement group to manage resources, and defining both training actors and inference engines. The training actors manage model initialization and weight updates, while the inference engines serve models via vLLM. Weight synchronization is carried out using CUDA IPC or NCCL, ensuring coherence and efficiency throughout the RLHF pipeline.

## Acknowledgements

> We would like to express our sincere gratitude to [Kaichao You](https://github.com/youkaichao) from the **vLLM** team and [Jian Hu](https://github.com/hijkzzz) from **OpenRLHF** for their invaluable contributions and close collaboration throughout this integration. Kaichao’s guidance on vLLM’s internals and RLHF API design significantly accelerated our implementation of high-throughput inference, while Jian’s deep insights into distributed RLHF architecture and training optimization were instrumental in refining OpenRLHF’s usability and performance. Their support not only made this work possible, but also laid the foundation for future advancements in efficient, scalable RLHF systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the **vLLM** contributors, including [Kaichao You](https://github.com/youkaichao), [Cody Yu](https://github.com/comaniac), [Rui Qiao](https://github.com/ruisearch42), and many others, without which the OpenRLHF integration with vLLM will not be possible. [Kaichao You](https://github.com/youkaichao) from the vLLM team leads the RLHF integration.

The ** OpenRLHF** project is an open-source project that provides xxx benefit, and we would like to thank xxx (contributors) for their major contribution to the OpenRLHF project.
```

As demand grows for training reasoning-capable large language models (LLMs), Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a cornerstone technique. However, conventional RLHF pipelines—especially those using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)—are often hindered by substantial computational overhead. This challenge is particularly pronounced with models that excel at complex reasoning tasks (such as OpenAI-o1 and DeepSeek-R1), where generating long chain-of-thought (CoT) outputs can account for up to 90% of total training time. These models must produce detailed, step-by-step reasoning that can span thousands of tokens, making inference significantly more time-consuming than the training phase itself. As a pioneering inference framework, vLLM provides a user-friendly interface for generating RLHF samples and updating model weights.

## Design of OpenRLHF

To strike a balance between performance and usability in RLHF frameworks, [OpenRLHF](https://github.com/OpenRLHF/OpenRLHF) is designed as a high-performance yet user-friendly solution that integrates key technologies like Ray, vLLM, Zero Redundancy Optimizer (ZeRO-3), and Automatic Tensor Parallelism (AutoTP):

> **Ray** acts as the backbone of OpenRLHF's distributed architecture. With powerful scheduling and orchestration features, Ray efficiently manages complex data flows and computations, including distributing rule-based reward models across multiple nodes.

Reviewer: add link to ray project?

        tensor_parallel_size=2,
        distributed_executor_backend="ray",
        gpu_memory_utilization=0.4,
        worker_extension_cls="__main__.ColocateWorkerExtension",
        bundle_indices=bundle_indices
    )
    inference_engines.append(llm)
```

[The complete example](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/getting_started/examples/rlhf_colocate.html) walks through initializing Ray with a specified GPU count, creating a placement group to manage resources, and defining both training actors and inference engines. The training actors manage model initialization and weight updates, while the inference engines serve models via vLLM. Weight synchronization is carried out using CUDA IPC or NCCL, ensuring coherence and efficiency throughout the RLHF pipeline.

## Acknowledgements

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the **vLLM** contributors, including [Kaichao You](https://github.com/youkaichao), [Cody Yu](https://github.com/comaniac), [Rui Qiao](https://github.com/ruisearch42), and many others, without which the OpenRLHF integration with vLLM will not be possible. [Kaichao You](https://github.com/youkaichao) from the vLLM team leads the RLHF integration.

> The **OpenRLHF** project is the first open-source RLHF framework based on Ray and vLLM. We would like to thank [Jian Hu](https://github.com/hijkzzz), [HollowMan6](https://github.com/HollowMan6), [Zilin Zhu](https://github.com/zhuzilin), [Xibin Wu](https://github.com/wuxibin89) and many others for their significant contributions to the Ray, vLLM Wrapper and Hybrid Engine components of the OpenRLHF project. [Jian Hu](https://github.com/hijkzzz) leads the development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **OpenRLHF** project is the first open-source RLHF framework based on Ray and vLLM. We would like to thank [Jian Hu](https://github.com/hijkzzz), [Songlin Jiang](https://github.com/HollowMan6), [Zilin Zhu](https://github.com/zhuzilin), [Xibin Wu](https://github.com/wuxibin89) and many others for their significant contributions to the Ray, vLLM Wrapper and Hybrid Engine components of the OpenRLHF project. [Jian Hu](https://github.com/hijkzzz) leads the development.
```
